Index for CBW programs and data files.


Template:

Program Name:  
Description:   
Brief Doc:     
Maintainer:    
Files:         


Programs:

Program Name:  cbw
Description:   Interactive code breaker's workbench.
Brief Doc:     Execute "runcbw", see cbw.doc.
Maintainer:    Bob Baldwin  (Baldwin@mit-xx) (eddie!baldwin.UUCP)
Files:         dblock.h, layout.h, parser.h, specs.h, window.h,
               banner.c, cblocks.c, dblock.c, dline.c, gblock.c,
               keylib.c, knit.c, parser.c, screen.c, start.c,
               stats.c, triglist.c, trigram.c, user.c, webster.c,
               windowlib.c


Program Name:  enigma
Description:   Identical to crypt command based on one-rotor enigma.
Brief Doc:     enigma <infile >outfile    It will ask for key.
Maintainer:    Bob Baldwin
Files:         enigma.c


Program Name:  zeecode
Description:   Zeecode assumes that the file zeecode.perm contains a .perm
	       file produced by cbw.  It uses the A0 and Zee permutations
	       in that file to decode the standard input, printing results
	       on the standard output.
Brief Doc:     zeecode <cipherfile >cleartextfile
               Reads zeecode.save to get A0 and Zee.
Maintainer:    Bob Baldwin
Files:         zeecode.c



Data Files:

Template:

File Name:	
Description:	


File Name:	*.slice
Description:	Pieces of .login file to init CBW shell variables.

File Name:	graphics
Description:	Cat'ing this file displays all the graphics characters
		on heath and vt100 terminals.

File Name:	cbw.log
Description:	History of changes to cbw source.

File Name:	cbw.doc and cbw.mss
Description:	User manual for cbw.

File Name:	trigrams.stats
Description:	Frequencies of common trigrams.

File Name:	mss-bigram.stats
Description:	Bigram statistics for scribe files. 

File Name:	mss.stats
Description:	Monogram statistics for scribe files. 

File Name:	*.cipher
Description:	Ciphertext file read by cbw.

File Name:	*.perm
Description:	Permutations saved by cbw to record partial solutions
		to a ciphertext.

File Name:	*.txt
Description:	Original text used to create the .cipher files.

File Name:	*.words
Description:	Lists of words for use with the probable-word guessing
		strategy.

File Name:	test3.words
Description:	Probable words for test3.cipher.
