  File: README
  Author: Douglas Jones
  From: Douglas W. Jones <jones@pyrite.cs.uiowa.edu>
  Date: Feb. 20, 1989 (Small bug fixes to Nov. 15 release).
  Purpose: Description of the splay-tree based compression and encryption
		software distribution.

This software distribution includes the following files:

	README     (you are reading this)
	splay.1    A man page for the splay and unsplay programs; if these
			programs are installed for public use, this file
			should be put in /usr/contrib/man1/splay.1 or some
			such (depending on how your local site manages this).
	splay.c    Code for the splay compression and encryption utility;
			typically, this should be compiled with a command
			such as cc -O -o splay splay.c and then the executable
			file should be stored in /usr/contrib/bin or some such
			(depending on how your local site manages such things).
	unsplay.c  Code for the unsplay expansion and decryption utility;
			do for this what you did with splay.c
	splay.i    Code used by both splay.c and unsplay.c, needed to compile
			both of them.  Changes to the declarations of register
			variables in the splay procedure in this file may be
			needed to improve performance.  Some C preprocessors
			may have trouble with some of the macros used here; in
			this case, these should be changed to procedures.

You may want to put splay.c, unsplay.c, and splay.i in /usr/contrib/src/splay
or some such file (depending on how your local site manages such things).

  NOTICE:  Please read the copyright notices in the source files before
	selling them or putting them into production use.

  NOTICE:  The development of this package was not funded by any agency.
	Jeffrey Chilton did the hard work as a student in the University of
	Iowa SSTP Summer Research Participation Program (SSTP = Student Science
	Training Program).  This allows secondary school students to work in
	university level research, and during the last 3 years, it and the few
	comparable programs in the US have been severely underfunded.  If this
	software is useful or even interesting to you, consider a donation to
	the University of Iowa Foundation, Iowa City, IA 52242, earmarked
	either for Computer Science or for Science Education (the former is
	where this work was done, the latter administers SSTP).

  NOTE:  This code was developed under BSD 4.3 UNIX.  Use under System V will
	require at least the following:  In splay.c and in unsplay.c, replace
	the include file <strings.h> with <string.h>.  In unsplay.c, line 106,
	replace the call to rindex with a call to strrchr.
