                          VOL. 58, No. 145

                      DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE (DOC)
         National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)

                      Docket No. 930659-3159
                          RIN 0693-AB19

 A Proposed Federal Information Processing Standard for an Escrowed
 Encryption Standard (EES)

                         58 FR 40791

                      Friday, July 30, 1993

 Notice; request for comments.

 SUMMARY: A Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) for an
 Escrowed Encryption Standard (EES) is being proposed. This
 proposed standard specifies use of a symmetric-key
 encryption/decryption algorithm and a key escrowing method which
 are to be implemented in electronic devices and used for
 protecting certain unclassified government communications when
 such protection is required. The algorithm and the key escrowing
 method are classified and are referenced, but not specified, in
 the standard.

    This proposed standard adopts encryption technology developed
 by the Federal government to provide strong protection for
 unclassified information and to enable the keys used in the
 encryption and decryption processes to be escrowed. This latter
 feature will assist law enforcement and other government agencies,
 under the proper legal authority, in the collection and decryption
 of electronically transmitted information. This proposed standard
 does not include identification of  key escrow  agents who will
 hold the keys for the  key escrow  microcircuits or the procedures
 for access to the keys. These issues will be addressed by the
 Department of Justice.

    The purpose of this notice is to solicit views from the public,
 manufacturers, and Federal, state, and local government users so
 that their needs can be considered prior to submission of this
 proposed standard to the Secretary of Commerce for review and
 approval.

    The proposed standard contains two sections: (1) An
 announcement section, which provides information concerning the
 applicability, implementation, and maintenance of the standard;
 and (2) a specifications section which deals with the technical
 aspects of the standard. Both sections are provided in this
 notice.


 DATES: Comments on this proposed standard must be received on or
 before September 28, 1993.


 ADDRESSES: Written comments concerning the proposed standard
 should be sent to: Director, Computer Systems Laboratory, ATTN:
 Proposed FIPS for Escrowed Encryption Standard, Technology
 Building, room B-154, National Institute of Standards and
 Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899.

    Written comments received in response to this notice will be
 made part of the public record and will be made available for
 inspection and copying in the Central Reference and Records
 Inspection Facility, room 6020, Herbert C. Hoover Building, 14th
 Street between Pennsylvania and Constitution Avenues, NW.,
 Washington, DC 20230.


 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Dr. Dennis Branstad, National
 Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899,
 telephone (301) 975-2913.


    SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This proposed FIPS implements the
 initiative announced by the White House Office of the Press
 Secretary on April 16, 1993. The President of the U.S. approved a
 Public Encryption Management directive, which among other actions,
 called for standards to facilitate the procurement and use of
 encryption devices fitted with  key-escrow  microcircuits in
 Federal communication systems that process sensitive, but
 unclassified information.

    Dated: July 26, 1993.

  Arati Prabhakar,
  Director.(NIST)


 - ----------------------------------------------------
  Federal Information Processing Standards Publication XX
  1993 XX
  Announcing the Escrowed Encryption Standard (EES)

    Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS
 PUBS) are issued by the National Institute of Standards and
 Technology (NIST) after approval by the Secretary of Commerce
 pursuant to section 111(d) of the Federal Property and
 Administrative Services Act of 1949 as amended by the Computer
 Security Act of 1987, Public Law 100-235.

  Name of Standard: Escrowed Encryption Standard (EES).

  Category of Standard: Telecommunications Security.

  Explanation: This Standard specifies use of a symmetric-key
 encryption (and decryption) algorithm and a Law Enforcement Access
 Field (LEAF) creation method (one part of a  key escrow  system)
 which provide for decryption of encrypted telecommunications when
 interception of the telecommunications is lawfully authorized.
 Both the algorithm and the LEAF creation method are to be
 implemented in electronic devices (e.g., very large scale
 integration chips). The devices may be incorporated in security
 equipment used to encrypt (and decrypt) sensitive unclassified
 telecommunications data. Decryption of lawfully intercepted
 telecommunications may be achieved through the acquisition and use
 of the LEAF, the decryption algorithm and escrowed key components.

    To escrow something (e.g., a document, an encryption key) means
 that it is "delivered to a third person to be given to the grantee
 only upon the fulfillment of a condition" (Webster's Seventh New
 Collegiate Dictionary). A key escrow  system is one that entrusts
 components of a key used to encrypt telecommunications to third
 persons, called key component escrow agents. In accordance with
 the common definition of "escrow", the key component escrow agents
 provide the key components to a "grantee" (i.e., a government
 agency) only upon fulfillment of the condition that the grantee
 properly demonstrates legal authorization to conduct electronic
 surveillance of communications which are encrypted using the
 specific device whose key component is requested. The key
 components obtained through this process are then used by the
 grantee to reconstruct the device unique key and obtain the
 session key (contained in the LEAF) which is used to decrypt the
 telecommunications that are encrypted with that device. The term,
 "escrow", for purposes of this standard, is restricted to the
 dictionary definition.

    The encryption/decryption algorithm has been approved for
 government applications requiring encryption of sensitive
 unclassified telecommunications of data as defined herein. The
 specific operations of the algorithm and the LEAF creation method
 are classified and hence are referenced, but not specified, in
 this standard.

    Data, for purposes of this standard, includes voice, facsimile
 and computer information communicated in a telephone system.
 Telephone system, for purposes of this standard, is limited to
 systems circuit-switched up to no more than 14.4 kbs or which use
 basic-rate ISDN, or to a similar grade wireless service.

    Data that is considered sensitive by a responsible authority
 should be encrypted if it is vulnerable to unauthorized disclosure
 during telecommunications. A risk analysis should be performed
 under the direction of a responsible authority to determine
 potential threats and risks. The costs of providing encryption
 using this standard as well as alternative methods and their
 respective costs should be projected. A responsible authority
 should then make a decision, based on the risk and cost analyses,
 whether or not to use encryption and then whether or not to use
 this standard.

  Approving Authority: Secretary of Commerce.

  Maintenance Agency: Department of Commerce, National Institute of
 Standards and Technology.

  Applicability: This standard is applicable to all Federal
 departments and agencies and their contractors under the
 conditions specified below. This standard may be used in designing
 and implementing security products and systems which Federal
 departments and agencies use or operate or which are operated for
 them under contract. These products may be used when replacing
 Type II and Type III (DES) encryption devices and products owned
 by the government and government contractors.

    This standard may be used when the following conditions apply:

    1. An authorized official or manager responsible for data
 security or the security of a computer system decides that
 encryption is required and cost justified as per OMB Circular A-
 130; and

    2. The data is not classified according to the National
 Security Act of 1947, as amended, or the Atomic Energy Act of
 1954, as amended.

    However, Federal departments or agencies which use encryption
 devices for protecting data that is classified according to either
 of these acts may use those devices also for protecting
 unclassified data in lieu of this standard.

    In addition, this standard may be adopted and used by non-
 Federal Government organizations. Such use is encouraged when it
 provides the desired security.

 Applications: Devices conforming to this standard may be used for
 protecting unclassified communications.

  Implementations: The encryption/decryption algorithm and the LEAF
 creation method shall be implemented in electronic devices (e.g.,
 electronic chip packages) that can be physically protected against
 unauthorized entry, modification and reverse engineering.
 Implementations which are tested and validated by NIST will be
 considered as complying with this standard. An electronic device
 shall be incorporated into a cyptographic module in accordance
 with FIPS 140-1. NIST will test for conformance with FIPS 140-1.
 Cryptographic modules can then be integrated into security
 equipment for sale and use in an application. Information about
 devices that have been validated, procedures for testing equipment
 for conformance with NIST standards, and information about
 obtaining approval of security equipment are available from the
 Computer Systems Laboratory, NIST, Gaithersburg, MD 20899.

  Export Control: Implementations of this standard are subject to
 Federal Government export controls as specified in title 22, Code
 of Federal Regulations, parts 120 through 131 (International
 Traffic of Arms Regulations -ITAR). Exporters of encryption
 devices, equipment and technical data are advised to contact the
 U.S. Department of State, Office of Defense Trade Controls for
 more information.   Patents: Implementations of this standard may
 be covered by U.S. and foreign patents.

  Implementation Schedule: This standard becomes effective thirty
 days following publication of this FIPS PUB.

  Specifications: Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS
 XXX)(affixed).

  Cross Index:

    a. FIPS PUB 46-2, Data Encryption Standard.

    b. FIPS PUB 81, Modes of Operation of the DES

    c. FIPS PUB 140-1, Security Requirements for Cryptographic
 Modules.


  Glossary:

    The following terms are used as defined below for purposes of
 this standard:

    Data-Voice, facsimile and computer information communicated in
 a telephone system.

    Decryption-Conversion of ciphertext to plaintext through the
 use of a cryptographic algorithm.

    Device (cryptographic)-An electronic implementation of the
 encryption/decryption algorithm and the LEAF creation method as
 specified in this standard.

    Digital data-Data that have been converted to a binary
 representation.

    Encryption-Conversion of plaintext to ciphertext through the
 use of a cryptographic algorithm.

    Key components-The values from which a key can be derived
 (e.g., KU sub 1 + KU sub 2).

    Key escrow -A process involving transferring one or more
 components of a cryptographic key to one or more trusted key
 component escrow agents for storage and later use by government
 agencies to decrypt ciphertext if access to the plaintext is
 lawfully authorized.

    LEAF Creation Method 1-A part of a  key escrow  system that is
 implemented in a cryptographic device and creates a Law
 Enforcement Access Field.

    Type I cryptography-A cryptographic algorithm or device
 approved by the National Security Agency for protecting classified
 information.

    Type II cryptography-A cryptographic algorithm or device
 approved by the National Security Agency for protecting sensitive
 unclassified information in systems as specified in section 2315
 of Title 10 United State Code, or section 3502(2) of Title 44,
 United States Code.

    Type III cryptography-A cryptographic algorithm or device
 approved as a Federal Information Processing Standard.

    Type III(E) cryptography-A Type III algorithm or device that is
 approved for export from the United States.

  Qualifications. The protection provided by a security product or
 system is dependent on several factors. The protection provided by
 this standard against key search attacks is greater than that
 provided by the DES (e.g., the cryptographic key is longer).
 However, provisions of this standard are intended to ensure that
 information encrypted through use of devices implementing this
 standard can be decrypted by a legally authorized entity.

  Where to Obtain Copies of the Standard: Copies of this
 publication are for sale by the National Technical Information
 Service, U.S. Department of Commerce, Springfield, VA 22161. When
 ordering, refer to Federal Information Processing Standards
 Publication XX (FIPS PUB XX), and identify the title. When
 microfiche is desired, this should be specified. Prices are
 published by NTIS in current catalogs and other issuances. Payment
 may be made by check, money order, deposit account or charged to a
 credit card accepted by NTIS.
  Specifications for the Escrowed Encryption Standard


  1. Introduction

    This publication specifies Escrowed Encryption Standard (EES)
 functions and parameters.


  2. General

    This standard specifies use of the SKIPJACK cryptographic
 algorithm and the LEAF Creation Method 1 (LCM-1) to be implemented
 in an approved electronic device (e.g., a very large scale
 integration electronic chip). The device is contained in a logical
 cryptographic module which is then integrated in a security
 product for encrypting and decrypting telecommunications.

    Approved implementations may be procured by authorized
 organizations for integration into security equipment. Devices
 must be tested and validated by NIST for conformance to this
 standard. Cryptographic modules must be tested and validated by
 NIST for conformance to FIPS 140-1.


  3. Algorithm Specifications

    The specifications of the encryption/decryption algorithm
 (SKIPJACK) and the LEAF Creation Method 1 (LCM-1) are classified.
 The National Security Agency maintains these classified
 specifications and approves the manufacture of devices which
 implement the specifications. NIST tests for conformance of the
 devices implementing this standard in cryptographic modules to
 FIPS 140-1 and FIPS 81.


  4. Functions and Parameters


  4.1 Functions

    The following functions, at a minimum, shall be implemented:

    1. Data Encryption: A session key (80 bits) shall be used to
 encrypt plaintext information in one or more of the following
 modes of operation as specified in FIPS 81: ECB, CBC, OFB (64) CFB
 (1, 8, 16, 32, 64).

    2. Data Decryption: The session key (80 bits) used to encrypt
 the data shall be used to decrypt resulting ciphertext to obtain
 the data.

    3.  Key Escrow:  The Family Key (KF) shall be used to create
 the Law Enforcement Access Field (LEAF) in accordance with the
 LEAF Creation Method 1 (LCM-1). The Session Key shall be encrypted
 with the Device Unique Key and transmitted as part of the LEAF.
 The security equipment shall ensure that the LEAF is transmitted
 in such a manner that the LEAF and ciphertext may be decrypted
 with legal authorization. No additional encryption or modification
 of the LEAF is permitted.


  4.2 Parameters

    The following parameters shall be used in performing the
 prescribed functions:

    1. Device Identifier (DID): The identifier unique to a
 particular device and used by the  Key Escrow  System.

    2. Device Unique Key (KU): The cryptographic key unique to a
 particular device and used by the  Key Escrow  System.

    3. Cryptographic Protocol Field (CPF): The field identifying
 the registered cryptographic protocol used by a particular
 application and used by the  Key Escrow  System (reserved for
 future specification and use).

    4. Escrow Authenticator (EA): A binary pattern that is inserted
 in the LEAF to ensure that the LEAF is transmitted and received
 properly and has not been modified, deleted or replaced in an
 unauthorized manner.

    5. Initialization Vector (IV): A mode and application dependent
 vector of bytes used to initialize, synchronize and verify the
 encryption, decryption and key escrow  functions.

    6. Family Key (KF): The cryptographic key stored in all devices
 designated as a family that is used to create the LEAF.

    7. Session Key (KS): The cryptographic key used by a device to
 encrypt and decrypt data during a session.
