




		   CRYPTOGRAPHY: POLICY AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS




				Lance J. Hoffman
				  Faraz A. Ali
				Steven L. Heckler
				 Ann Huybrechts





				December 1, 1993
Revised January 30, 1994




			under contract DE-AC05-84OR21400

Work supported in part by the U. S. Department of Energy under contract DE-
AC05-84OR21400.  The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not
necessarily state or reflect those of the United States Government or any
agency thereof.






				    CONTENTS



	  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

	  1.  INTRODUCTION

	  2.  TECHNOLOGY

	  3.  MARKET ANALYSIS

	  4.  EXPORT CONTROLS

	  5.  PUBLIC POLICY ISSUES
	       5.1  EXECUTIVE BRANCH
	       5.2  CONGRESS
	       5.3  TRENDS

	  6.  POTENTIAL SCENARIOS

	  REFERENCES






				EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


During the past five years, encryption technology has become easily available
to both individuals and businesses, affording them a level of security
formerly available practically to only military, national security, and law
enforcement agencies. As a result, a debate within the United States about
the proper balance between national security and personal freedom has been
initiated. Law enforcement and national security agencies would like to
maintain tight control over civilian encryption technologies, while industry
and individual and privacy rights advocates fight to expand their ability to
distribute and use cryptographic products as they please.

This report analyzes trends in encryption technology, markets, export
controls, and legislation.  It identifies five trends which will have a
strong influence on cryptography policy in the United States:

     * The continued expansion of the Internet and the progressive
     miniaturization of cryptographic hardware combined with the  increasing
     availability and use of strong cryptographic software means that the
     strongest encryption technologies will  continue to become more easily
     obtainable everywhere in the years ahead.

     * Additional growth in networked and wireless communication will fuel a
     strong demand for encryption hardware and software both domestically and
     abroad, causing the U. S. high-technology industry to be increasingly
     interested in selling encryption products overseas and in modifying
     current export restrictions.

     * Due to the responsibilities and bureaucratic dispositions of key
     Executive Branch agencies, products using strong encryption algorithms
     such as DES will continue to face at least some export  restrictions,
     despite the widespread availability of strong encryption products
     overseas.

     * The American public is likely to become increasingly concerned about
     its privacy and about cryptographic policy as a result of the increased
     amount of personal information available online and the growing number
     of wireless and networked communications.  The development and
     increasingly widespread use of the National Information Infrastructure
     will heighten these concerns.

     * Encryption policy is becoming an important public policy issue that
     will engage the attention of all branches of government.  Congress will
     become increasingly visible in this debate due to its power of agency
     oversight and its role in passing laws accommodating the United States'
     rapid rate of technological change.  Agencies will remain very important
     since they have the implementing and, often, the planning
     responsibilities.  Since individuals and industry have more direct
     influence over Congress than over most other branches of government,
     Congress may place somewhat more emphasis on personal freedom than many
     other government actors.

Four potential scenarios are likely: mandatory escrowed encryption, voluntary
escrowed encryption, complete decontrol of encryption, or domestic decontrol
with strict export regulations.






				1.  INTRODUCTION


During the past five years, encryption technology has become easily available
to both individuals and businesses, affording them a level of security
formerly available practically to only military, national security, and law
enforcement agencies.  This availability and the desirability of encrypting
some communications is just starting to be generally recognized by American
business, and the encryption market is just now beginning to emerge as a
significant part of the computer security market.  As a result, a debate
within the United States about the proper balance of national security, law
enforcement, and personal freedom has been initiated.  Law enforcement and
national security agencies would like to maintain tight control over civilian
encryption technologies, while industry and individual and privacy rights
advocates fight to expand their ability to distribute and use cryptographic
products as they please.1

This report analyzes trends in encryption technology and policy against this
backdrop.  It is one in a trilogy of research papers being prepared under the
direction of Professor James Chandler of the George Washington University
National Law Center and Professor Lance Hoffman of the George Washington
University School of Engineering and Applied Science, Department of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science.  The papers cover the following
topics:

     Issues Regarding the Use of Cryptographic Technologies in the Commercial
     Sector.  Review and analysis of U.S. laws, regulations, and case law
     pertaining to the use of commercial encryption products for voice and
     data communications between private parties located within continental
     U.S. boundaries and with parties in foreign jurisdictions, including
     examination of all applicable Federal statutes, regulations, executive
     orders, and other publicly available sources of legally binding
     directives.  Laws or regulations which have been interpreted as
     mandating the use of cryptographic systems are also included. 2

     Foreign Encryption Technology Controls.  Identification and analysis of
     foreign laws and regulations pertaining to the use and control of
     commercial encryption products for voice and data communications. 3

     Cryptography: Trends in Technology and Policy (this paper).
     Encapsulation of current legislation and analysis of trends based on the
     above papers with future implications for encryption technology and the
     use of commercial encryption products.

This report is divided into four primary sections:

     * Technology:  future trends in high technology and, more specifically,
     encryption technology.

     * Market Analysis:  trends in the global market for encryption products,
     especially DES- and RSA-based products.


     * Export Controls: trends that may influence the wording and
     implementation of laws restricting export of encryption products
     manufactured in the United States.

     * Public Policy Issues: factors and trends that may determine the future
     direction of policy decisions and legislation related to cryptography in
     the United States.

After discussions of these topics, four potential scenarios are briefly
presented as possibilities.

The authors appreciate the constructive criticism of early drafts and helpful
suggestions made by Diana Arrington, Donna Berkelhammer, James Chandler,
Larry E. Christensen, Dorothy Denning, Bill Franklin, Lou Giles, Lamaris
Gill, Lynn McNulty, Randolph Williams, Doug Miller, Robert Rarog, Allan
Suchinsky, and others.  Conclusions or opinions in this paper are, however,
those solely of the authors and are not necessarily shared by any of the
other persons.






				 2.  TECHNOLOGY


Commercial encryption technology has evolved since the popular 'Data
Encryption Standard' (DES)4 was released to the public in 1977 and will
continue to do so during the foreseeable future.  From a situation then when
only private key systems were generally in use, public key systems have
become increasingly popular, especially for authentication.  Detailed reviews
of the evolution of cryptography over the last sixteen years or so can be
found in [5] and [6].   In particular, hardware encryption devices will
become smaller, users will use signatures and digests (typically public key
systems7, 8 as well as private key systems), and encryption algorithms will
become increasingly powerful.9

A cryptographic system generally provides for two functions:  encryption and
decryption.  The encryption function converts data from 'plaintext,' or
normal text, into 'ciphertext,' which is incomprehensible to the casual
observer.  The decryption function reverses this process, restoring the data
to its original form.  In order to perform either of these functions (i.e. to
send or receive an encrypted message), the system's user must have a unique
'key,' a sequence of bits.  This key is input to the algorithm to
successfully perform the desired conversion.  The strength of an encryption
scheme is dependent both upon the strength of its algorithm and, often, on
the length of the keys used for encryption and decryption.  Longer key
lengths mean more possible keys for an intruder to try and thus imply greater
security.  Encryption and decryption are generally performed by a computer
with the assistance of hardware and/or software cryptographic products.

A trend in encryption products, concurrent with the same trend in computer
technology in general, is towards increasing miniaturization.  For example,
in 1988 the primary encryption device manufactured by AT&T weighed seventeen
pounds.  Now, with the advent of PCMCIA (Personal Computer Memory Card
Industry Association) technology, it is widely anticipated that one or more
manufacturers will soon release encryption-capable modems the size of a
credit card.

Some observers feel a trend is developing from hardware or software/hardware
products to software-only products9, 10  because software is cheaper, easier to
install and use, and takes up less space on a computer than hardware.  Others
disagree, thinking that the future of encryption technology may be in
hardware-based products, because they are faster, harder to compromise, and
also take up very little space now because of developments in VLSI (Very
Large Scale Integrated) chip design .11

There is also a growing use of 'public-key' cryptography systems.9, 13  Under
a more traditional single key system, the same key is used both for
encrypting and decrypting the message.  Although this is reasonably secure,
there is a risk that this key will be intercepted when the parties involved
exchange keys.  A public key system, however, does not necessitate the
exchange of a secret key in the transmission of messages.  The sender
encrypts the message with the recipient's freely-disclosed, unique public
key.  The recipient, in turn, uses her unique private key to decrypt the
message.7  It is also possible to encrypt messages with the sender's private
key, allowing anyone who knows the sender's public key to decrypt the
message.  This process is crucial to creating digital signatures, as
discussed later.

Coincident with the increase in electronic communications is the need to
write one's own signature on both business and personal transactions.  At the
moment, writing one's own signature requires written messages.  Now, however,
electronic communications have become so heavily used that many business and
personal transactions will flourish between parties who never actually see
each other and physically sign no paper; increasingly, digital signatures
will be used to provide message authentication.

Public-key cryptography also enables the user to produce a digital signature
by encrypting with her private key, which, when decrypted with her public
key, provides verification that the message originated from that user.
Possible applications for this technology include online financial
transactions and business negotiations.

The DES (Data Encryption Standard) and RSA (named after its inventors Rivest,
Shamir, and Adelman) algorithms are generally considered two of the strongest
algorithms on the market.  DES is a strong, private-key algorithm developed
by IBM and made a standard by the United States government in the late
1970's.  RSA, in turn, is the most popular public-key algorithm.14  It is
based on prime number generation, using the fact that it is very difficult to
factor the product of two large prime numbers. Encryption hardware and
software products incorporating DES and RSA are widely available both
domestically and abroad.  Over two million instantiations of RSA have been
distributed in the United States, in almost every case seamlessly embedded by
the vendor.  By the end of 1994, this number will rise to five million and by
the end of 1995, it will double.15

PGP (Pretty Good Privacy), 16 which originally incorporated RSA, employs
public-key cryptography and puts together strong algorithms for both
authentication and message transmission.  It now uses a combination of the
IDEA (International Data Encryption Algorithm)17 and
MD5 algorithms 
and can be obtained over the Internet via anonymous FTP ("file transfer
protocol").

DES continues to be an important standard for encrypting data, particularly
within the U. S. and foreign financial communities.  The National Institutes
for Standard and Technology (NIST) is in the process of recertifying DES as
a national standard for the next five years.  However, the security of DES in
the future is worrisome to some scientists, who contend that advances in
technology will soon make it possible to break DES by 'brute force,' using a
powerful computer to try every possible combination of keys until the correct
key is discovered.  Indeed, in ten years, DES may no longer be secure.18

In contrast, SKIPJACK, the classified encryption/decryption algorithm used in
the White House's key escrow ('Clipper') initiative, utilizes an 80-bit key,
24 bits longer than the 56-bit key used in DES.  The interim report of the
SKIPJACK evaluators chosen by NSA and NIST came to three conclusions:19

     1.   Under an assumption that the cost of processing power is halved
	  every eighteen months, it will be 36 years before the cost of
	  breaking SKIPJACK by exhaustive search will be equal to the cost of
	  breaking DES today.  Thus, there is no significant risk that
	  SKIPJACK will be broken by exhaustive search in the next 30-40
	  years.

     2.   There is no significant risk that SKIPJACK can be broken through a
	  shortcut method of attack.

     3.   While the internal structure of SKIPJACK must be classified in
	  order to protect law enforcement and national security objectives,
	  the strength of SKIPJACK against a cryptanalytic attack does not
	  depend on the secrecy of the algorithm.

Other sources report that many industry representatives believe that
processing power doubles about every six months to a year.  This would reduce
the "safe time" of the first point above to approximately 12-18 years, rather
than 30-40 years.

Other escrow schemes are also available.  Micali20 has proposed a multikey
escrow capability in which multiple trusted parties authenticate a message
and/or allow eavesdropping.  In a recent unpublished paper, Desmedt, Frankel,
and Yung state that threshold cryptosystems (as presented at recent Crypto,
Asiacrypt, and Eurocrypt conferences) can have the same functionality as key
escrow schemes without relying on "(expensive) tamperproof devices."21

The increasing use and availability of encryption technology logically
accompanies the exponential increase in electronic communications over the
past few years.  Commercial use of the Internet has increased dramatically
during the past two years, and noncommercial use is on the rise as well.22
Indeed, as the New York Times whimsically notes, "Forget Elaine's.  Internet
is currently the world's most fashionable rendezvous."  It touches down in
137 countries and links 15 million to 30 million people and is growing by a
million users each month.23

This growth in the popularity of the Internet has created a demand for
security.  Electronic mail users who desire confidentiality and sender
authentication increasingly are demanding encryption.  Some are already using
PGP.  Others are starting to use Privacy Enhanced Mail (PEM), an Internet
encryption mechanism which was funded by the Advanced Research Projects
Agency of the Defense Department and has recently been introduced as a
commercial product by Trusted Information Systems, Inc.  It uses the DES
algorithm for encryption and the RSA algorithm for sender authentication and
key management. Privacy Enhanced Mail also provides support for
nonrepudiation; this allows the third-party recipient of a forwarded message
to verify the identity of the message originator (not just the message
forwarder) and to verify if any of the original text has been altered.24, 25
Although PEM is not yet widespread, a number of vendors are offering it in
conjunction with or integrated into their commercial electronic mail
applications and the European Community has adopted PEM for its PASSWORD
project26  which is part of an attempt to establish a pilot security
infrastructure for network applications for the European research community.
Ironically, a Federally funded chip, Clipper, now is being pushed as a
substitute for this mechanism which has already been paid for largely by
government funds and is already in place.

The increasing number of electronic funds transfers (EFTs) between banks has
necessitated the increasing use of message authentication systems, to
determine if a message has originated from its proper source and to determine
if there have been any modifications.27  One institution alone, the Clearing
House Interbank Payment System, currently moves an average of one trillion
dollars each day via wire and satellite.28   Strong encryption is necessary to
provide security and authentication for these electronic money transfers (and
is also why export restrictions on the DES algorithm have been relaxed for
financial institutions).

Despite these leaps in technology, telefacsimile (fax) transmissions are not
yet widely encrypted, even though fax is a widely used form of data
communications.  According to a Datapro 1993 report27,  there are only 11
encryption devices which accommodate FAX transmissions.  It is inconvenient
to equip both the sending and receiving machine with compatible encryption
before facsimile transmission; the fax protocol has no convenient place for
inserting non-fax functions such as encryption; and, until recently, there
has been little awareness of security threats among fax users.  However,
increasing use of fax transmissions by businesses who wish to keep their
corporate information and finances confidential and an increasing awareness
of the security problems will require the availability of more products which
encrypt fax communications.

Credit cards and ATMs are the forerunners of what may soon become 'digital
cash.'  On the average, people use less pocket cash every year. Indeed,
credit-card purchases are now used for one-tenth of all consumer payments.29
David Chaum, head of the Cryptography Group at the Center for Mathematics and
Computer Science (CWI) in Amsterdam, has proposed a distributed smart card
system which, using public key cryptography, allows anonymous cash embodied
by the cards to be used like real money.28 This is another consequence of the
increasing digitization of financial transactions: 'Ubiquitous digital cash
dovetails well with massive electronics networks.  It's a pretty sound bet
the Internet-today's version of the Net-will be the first place that e-money
will infiltrate deeply.' 29

One of the consequences of an increasingly electronics-oriented economy will
be the need to provide some amount of anonymity and privacy for users of such
a digital cash system in order to ensure that electronic money remains
anonymous and untraceable, except by the payer and payee.  Government
approval will be requisite for digital cash to gain full approval by the
business community and public, and the government may require access to these
transaction records to prevent what might otherwise become "perfect crimes."
30

In conclusion, the current trends in encryption technology include increasing
miniaturization, increasing use of public and private-key cryptography, and
the continued development of increasingly secure algorithms.  These trends
are all coincident with the skyrocketing use of the Internet and other types
of electronic communications, particularly electronic money communications.






			       3.  MARKET ANALYSIS


The market for encryption products is rapidly growing.27 This market trend is
concomitant with the increasing use of personal computers, fax machines, and
e-mail for electronic communications.  A large encryption market has also
arisen because of wireless communications, such as cellular telephones. There
are already 12 million subscribers to cellular telephone services in the
United States, and the trend is toward more wireless communications in the
future.  Since they are easier to intercept than wire-based ones, the demand
for encryption technology will increase as concern for data integrity
increases.9

This growth in the market for encryption is occurring both in the United
States and abroad.  According to International Resource Development, the U.
S. data encryption market reached an estimated $384 million in 1991, and will
jump to $946 million by 1996.  The total worldwide market, estimated at $695
million in 1991, is predicted to grow at a similar rate, reaching $1.8
billion by 1996.31

The encryption market is no longer left to United States companies to
dominate.  A Software Publishers Association (SPA) survey shows 264 foreign
encryption products and 288 domestic products.  These findings contrast
sharply with the large global market shares (approximately 75%) enjoyed by
United States software publishers and hardware manufacturers in other areas.32
Of the 264 foreign products, 123 products use DES.36

Citing the relatively stringent export controls enforced by the United States
government as being one of the main reasons for the increasing market share
of foreign cryptographic products in the global market, many manufacturers
are currently lobbying the government to relax these export controls in an
effort to keep United States technology competitive abroad.  The SPA claims
that most software and hardware vendors, aware of these export controls,
decide not to manufacture encryption technology because they realize that
their very best technology cannot be exported.  Thus, they claim, there are
far fewer domestic vendors than would otherwise exist.10

Many commentators have speculated on the influence of the escrow encryption
standard (Clipper) on the global market.  Georgetown University Professor
Dorothy Denning, one of the evaluators of the SKIPJACK algorithm used in the
proposed key-escrow arrangement and an advocate of its deployment, states
that if the technology provided by Clipper catches on, it could become the de
facto standard in the United States, either the only device or the
predominant device available on the market.33

Marc Rotenberg, director of the Washington office of Computer Professionals
for Social Responsibility (CPSR), believes that the government would be able
to wield considerable clout in making the key-escrow arrangement a de facto
standard on the market.13   He explains that the government can exert enormous
authority on creating, developing, and enforcing technical standards through
the procurement process.  Through this procurement process, the government
can require any manufacturer selling phones to the government or government
contractors to install the key-escrow arrangement in their phones.  AT&T
supplies an enormous amount of telecommunications services and equipment to
the government, thus making the government one of AT&T's largest customers.
In response to the Presidentially approved Clipper initiative, AT&T has
started incorporating the key-escrow arrangement in some of its phones, a
powerful illustration of the enormous spending power of the government.

However, the Federal government does not represent a large percentage of the
market or the revenue for all American companies providing communications or
computer technology.  For example, Bill Ferguson of Semaphore Communications
Corp. states that government purchases are less than one percent of
Semaphore's global sales potential.  With trade restrictions applied, the
government still supplies less than five percent of Semaphore's expected
sales.34   Companies such as Semaphore and many represented by the SPA see
foreign markets as potentially larger sources of income than the U. S.
government and therefore want trade restrictions relaxed so that more market
opportunities can open up.  As it stands now, many in the encryption industry
fear that products using the Clipper chip will be effectively unexportable
due to United States government retention of the keys.35,36

The Clinton administration has stated that use of a key escrow system will
not be mandatory ("The Administration has progressed far enough in its review
to conclude it will not propose new legislation to limit use of encryption
technology.")37.  However, if this decision were reversed (perhaps by a later
administration), there is some danger that the proposed key-escrow
arrangement could function as a 'Digital Volstead Act,' the 1920's
prohibition on alcohol.  Like Prohibition and the organized crime that
resulted from it, the key-escrow arrangement could encourage contempt for law
enforcement and a complete disregard of the law.35  Doug Miller of the SPA
feels that a black market would almost certainly arise if the United States
government makes some standard mandatory.10

Given the increased use of computers and networks, a steady increase in the
market for encryption products is likely, as is a continued expansion into
this market by foreign manufacturers.  United States hardware and software
producers, stymied by relatively stringent export restrictions imposed by the
United States government and possibly further hindered by the necessity of
accommodating what may be an unexportable Clipper standard, may find it even
more difficult to remain competitive players in international markets.






			       4.  EXPORT CONTROLS


Existing controls on the export of encryption software and hardware has been
a topic of concern for United States manufacturers and vendors. Despite a
February 1991 COCOM decision to decontrol all mass market software, including
encryption software, as other commercial, dual-use items, United States
export control policy continues to categorize many encryption items as
'munitions-related', thereby subjecting them to applicable export laws.38
Anyone wishing to export the strongest encryption products is therefore
required, under the Arms Export Control Act, to obtain individual licenses
from the Office of Defense Trade Controls at the State Department (though
some products of lesser strength are under the control of the Commerce
Department).39  This has led to a prohibition on export of encryption products
using the popular and relatively powerful DES algorithm for file and data
encryption (except for financial applications and use by subsidiaries of U.
S. companies abroad).

Obtaining a license for these restricted encryption products includes a
review of the product by the National Security Agency (NSA) to determine its
exportability.  According to Allan Suchinsky, Chief of Electronic and Combat
Systems Licensing at the Office of Defense Trade Controls at the Department
of State, this process normally takes between one and six weeks.40  According
to some officials and business people, however, a newly developed encryption
product can actually take up to ten months to go through the review process,
although products employing certain algorithms are either on a list of
automatically approved items or eligible for 'fast track' consideration. In
the high-tech arena where product cycles are often measured in months, large
market shares can be lost due to such delays.  Some industry representatives
have complained that the average time it takes to obtain a similar license
for encryption products outside the United States is much less.34

The market analysis above describes the steadily growing global market for
strong encryption products, one that is potentially worth millions (if not
billions) of dollars. But United States manufacturers believe that their
hands are tied by stringent export laws which, for 'national security'
reasons, prohibit the export of encryption products of DES strength or
stronger to anyone other than financial institutions.  They also believe that
foreign manufacturers in Europe and elsewhere are not similarly restricted,
and are free to manufacture and export DES- and RSA-based products. This
asymmetry in export laws has undesirable consequences for United States
manufacturers of encryption products.

DES-based products are already being used in encryption products manufactured
in foreign countries including Japan, Russia, Germany, France, Austria, UK,
Switzerland, Netherlands, Austria, Australia and Sweden.32  The DES algorithm,
in fact, is also freely obtainable via the Internet, as is DES-based
encryption software. The encryption 'genie'  would appear to be out of the
bottle, and at this point it is not clear to United States companies  why the
State Department is inhibiting the wide proliferation of DES technology,41 now
that it is not in a position to prevent it. Along with this, one must
consider the trends towards implementation of encryption products in
software, and the miniaturization of encryption hardware. Taken together,
these trends indicate that it will become increasingly difficult to enforce
the existing export laws, and tougher to prevent the spread of DES-caliber
algorithms.  Despite this, many government officials have continued to speak
strongly in favor of continued restrictions on DES, stating that attempting
to control export of products using the algorithm still prevents a
significant number of international terrorists, criminals, and unfriendly
foreign powers from acquiring advanced encryption technology.  As a result,
they believe that export restrictions on DES remain in the United States'
best interest, even if they may not always be fully effective.40

The current export restrictions have a detrimental effect on many U.S.
companies.  According to Addison Fischer of Fischer International, "export
controls are estimated to have cost Fischer International millions of dollars
in lost revenue for cryptographic products"42  due to rejection by foreign
customers of the weaker encryption products United States companies are
forced to supply, lost sales opportunities, and delays with paperwork
necessary for obtaining the appropriate licenses.  And since DES is already
easily available overseas, Fischer feels that existing export restrictions
are simply placing an embargo on United States DES-based products. Similar
complaints have been voiced by other United States companies.  The Computer
Systems Security and Privacy Advisory Board agrees that "current controls are
negatively impacting U. S. competitiveness in the world market and are not
inhibiting the foreign production and use of cryptography [DES and RSA]." 43

Thus, if the United States government continues to control DES-strength
encryption manufactured in the U.S., the following results may come to pass:

     * Foreign competitors of United States encryption companies will likely
     gain control of the global market for encryption products.

     * United States companies will lose significant market share in the
     global market for encryption products. They are likely to lose sales
     opportunities as they compete in the electronic security market against
     products based on DES and RSA with their own weaker versions based on
     RC2 and RC4.

     * DES strength encryption will continue to proliferate to foreign
     destinations, either through foreign companies or through the
     ever-growing Internet. The effort of current United States export policy
     to inhibit this by restricting exports on DES-based technology is
     unlikely to succeed.

     * If, indeed, United States companies get displaced in the international
     encryption marketplace, United States 'national security' will also be
     threatened by a weakened domestic encryption (and computer) industry.


In July 1992, the Software Publishers Association reached an agreement with
the Bush Administration that would permit an expedited 7-day review process
for products based on RC2 and RC4 algorithms.  These algorithms are still
much weaker than DES; but they are also stronger than any other algorithms
which were exportable prior to this agreement.  This was an important
development in the effort to decontrol the export of encryption products from
the United States.  Projecting forward from this milestone, it is likely that
as the private sector continues to push for further relaxation of these
controls, more and stronger encryption products will be put on similar
'autolists' for automatic export approval.

The Federal government seeks to encourage the use of key escrow systems for
encrypting telecommunications.44  The standard proposed for these systems, the
"Clipper" escrowed encryption standard,45  is particularly noteworthy in light
of the fact that law enforcement officials, with a court order, can obtain
both parts of a special key that enables them to decrypt transmissions
encrypted with a particular chip.  At the time of this writing, how Clipper
will be treated for export purposes is not clear.  If it is treated the same
way as DES, it will certainly provide another example of the Byzantine nature
of U. S. export policy.  In any case, it is likely that foreign customers
will reject these products, due to fears of both United States tampering and
the possible existence of a secret 'trap door,' which would enable
unauthorized parties to decrypt Clipper-encrypted transmissions, even without
the escrowed parts of the special key.  Chris Sundt of the multinational
International Computers Ltd. (ICL) claims this very fear will be the basis of
rejecting Clipper as an encryption alternative in international markets.46
Other United States based companies share his concern that the key escrow
chip is effectively unexportable.47

In spite of the concerns described above, it appears unlikely that United
States export laws will become as relaxed as those in many European
countries.  DES-based products for file and data encryption will probably not
be removed from the munitions list in the near future.  Almost everyone
interviewed for this report felt that NSA will continue to play an
increasingly dominant role in the debate over cryptography in the U.S., and
will continue to have influence much stronger than NIST's on encryption
policy issues.  NSA will continue to strongly voice its opinions to the
President and pressure him to keep DES-based encryption on the munitions list
and under the jurisdiction of the Department of State.






			    5.  PUBLIC POLICY ISSUES


5.1  EXECUTIVE BRANCH

Due to the increasing public availability of strong hardware- and
software-based encryption products, a debate over their regulation and use is
emerging.48   The debate over Clipper and regulation of other encryption
technologies is, in many ways, the continuation of an ongoing discussion in
the United States about the proper balance between national security and
individual freedom of action.  On one side of the debate are those agencies
charged with defending America from crime, terrorism, and external threat,
such as the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the National Security
Agency (NSA), the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of State, and
the Department of Justice.  These powerful agencies, in turn, are challenged
by advocacy groups and high-technology industries, which place a greater
emphasis on individual rights, in particular personal privacy, or corporate
profits.  The United States Congress may play a major role in determining the
balance between the two.

There are several powerful agencies which are leading the Administration's
effort to control encryption technology.  First and foremost among these is
the National Security Agency, which for years was the sole controller of
strong encryption in the United States.  NSA has two primary goals on its
agenda.  The most overt one is the protection of United States national
security, which the NSA does largely with the help of signal intelligence.49
If terrorists of foreign agents were to obtain and use strong encryption
hardware or software, NSA's efforts to learn about and thwart their
activities would be considerably more difficult.  Indeed, as Marc Rotenberg
of Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility comments, the continued
development of encryption technologies poses one of the most significant
challenges the agency has faced during the post-Cold War era.13

Less obvious but also important is NSA's effort to protect its preeminent
role in civilian cryptography.  For years, NSA had almost complete control
over developments in the encryption field.  In recent years, however, this
control has begun to erode as private firms and individuals have begun
aggressively developing and using encryption technologies.  The end of the
Cold War and the assignment of responsibility by the Computer Security Act of
1987 50 for development of federal unclassified computer security standards
(including cryptography standards) to NIST has threatened many aspects of
NSA's traditional role.  Doug Miller of the Software Publishers Association
observed that 'NSA throughout its existence . . . has had every incentive to
delay the inevitable' (individuals obtaining full control of their own
cryptography).10

The FBI is primarily concerned with investigating serious crimes and
thwarting domestic terrorism.  In a small number of important cases, such as
those involving drug trafficking, organized crime, or terrorism, the FBI
gathers information via wiretaps.  Indeed, wiretaps have been used in to
gather evidence in 90% of terrorism cases brought to trial.51  However, the
FBI has not been able to point to a single case to date where encryption has
hampered their investigation of a case.

Several developments, however, are making these wiretaps progressively more
difficult to conduct.  Two of these are the increasing complexity of the
United States telecommunications infrastructure and the gradual replacement
of copper wires by fiber optics, which can carry thousands of conversations
in a single strand of fiber.  Both of these changes make it more difficult
for agents, even with phone companies' help, to isolate individual
conversations.49   In addition, the development of publicly available
encryption threatens to delay or prevent the FBI's ability to utilize the
contents of these wiretaps.  This poses serious risks to the lives and safety
of the American people whom the FBI is charged to protect, especially in
cases where the Bureau is relying on real-time interception of phone calls to
protect citizens from harm or to apprehend a suspect.52

Most of the other executive agencies and departments involved in the
regulation of encryption technology have similar agendas:  protecting
American citizens from harm and defending their areas of responsibility and
influence within the government.49

There are Constitutional issues related to encryption controls, and the
Clinton administration recognized this when it announced the Clipper
initiative.44  Its later review has so far found no impinging on Americans'
Constitutional rights.37   Our colleagues at the GW National Law Center
basically agree.2,3  Other lawyers have differing points of view.53, 54

Professor James Chandler of the George Washington University National Law
Center observes that some United States industries and proponents of
individual rights tend to place a stronger emphasis on freedom of action than
national security and thus oppose stringent limitations on encryption
technology.55   The software publishing community and vendors of
hardware-based encryption devices have generally focused their opposition on
current United States export restrictions, which cost them millions of
dollars annually.11  Making a somewhat different argument, individual rights
advocacy groups such as Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility
(CPSR) and the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) assert that government
is too often intrusive in people's lives and needs to be restrained in this
domain.  As a result, they tend to oppose any policy initiative which would
increase the ability of the government to monitor activities of persons.55


5.2  CONGRESS

Congress, with its power to make laws and oversee the activities of federal
agencies, can be a significant factor in this ongoing debate.  While the
players named so far have their own, narrowly defined agendas, Congress'
actions are more likely to pay closer attention to the will of the American
people, on whose vote and support their jobs depend.  Indeed, this dynamic
has already been demonstrated.

In 1991, the FBI sponsored the Digital Telephony Proposal, which required
telecommunications equipment manufacturers and service providers to make sure
that their products had a built-in means whereby law enforcement officials
could successfully tap into any conversation provided they obtained a
warrant.1  This initiative was undertaken by the FBI in response to increasing
fear that with the advent of digital phone lines, fiber optics, and advanced
telephony in general, law enforcement might no longer be able to conduct
wiretaps in the near future.  Unfortunately for the FBI, the Digital
Telephony Proposal angered a large number of voters and telecommunications
equipment manufacturers, who in turn put pressure on their congressmen.10  As
a result, the proposal was never allowed to reach the House floor.

Congress has very recently mandated a comprehensive study of cryptography
technology and national cryptography policy by the National Academy of
Sciences.56   Opponents pointed out that this proposal, while in some ways
meritorious, might also have the effect of preserving the status quo for
several years, even though the status quo was characterized by some as early
as 1981 as needing to be "realigned to promote both national security,
broadly defined, and encourage private-sector competence in designing and
applying secure systems."57  The study will start up in  late 1993 or early
1994.

Marc Rotenberg of CPSR observed that the FBI and NSA have learned from the
fate of the Digital Telephony Proposal and have attempted to avoid
Congressional intervention with the Clipper initiative by going through the
White House instead of Congress.   Barring such intervention at this point,
he feels the administration will likely face only limited opposition within
the Administration to the Clipper initiative.13  Thus, any slowdown of this
initiative is more likely to materialize, if it does at all, in Congress.  As
more people perform an increasing number and range of transactions over
electronic networks, they are becoming increasingly concerned about the
integrity of their personal information and about maintaining their privacy.
Of those interviewed in a Macworld poll released July 1993,58 78% expressed
concerns about their personal privacy (up from 64% in 1978) and 68% felt
their privacy was threatened by computers (up from 38% in 1974).  Other
independent surveys confirm this trend.59  While many of the survey results
relate specifically to databases, often in specific sectors such as credit
reporting, computer systems as a whole, including those with insecure
communication lines, are coming under increasing scrutiny.  Congress will be
placed under escalating pressure to pass new laws governing information
technology, especially with the increased attention being devoted to the
design and development of the National Information Infrastructure.60

Congress' decisions in this area and indeed the outcomes of the debate over
encryption policy in general will be the result of the ongoing struggle in
American society among government, individuals, and industries.  Although
this struggle will likely result in oscillations in policy, national security
may be gradually redefined in terms of economic security.  This is the
expectation of Professor James Chandler,55  who anticipates that controls on
the export of encryption hardware and software will eventually be lifted.

There are already some signs that Congress may be willing to ease
restrictions on the export of encryption products and perhaps in other
encryption-related areas as well.  In early 1991, the Software Publishers
Association suggested an amendment to the renewal of the Export
Administration Act that would have transferred authority over software
exports to the Commerce Department.  This amendment, the Levine Amendment,
was accepted by the House Foreign Affairs Committee, prompting aggressive
lobbying by the National Security Agency of key congressmen in order to
prevent inclusion of this amendment in the reauthorization bill.  Despite
this lobbying, the full House kept the amendment in the Export Administration
Act reauthorization.61  NSA later succeeded in persuading President George
Bush to promise a veto of any reauthorization bill which included the Levine
Amendment or similar provisions, but this incident does demonstrate Congress'
more liberal stance on encryption export regulation.  And, of course, there
is a different administration now in power.  H. R. 3627, introduced in the
closing days of Congress' 1993 session,62 effectively does the same thing, and
it is conceivable that it will pass in 1994.


5.3  TRENDS

To summarize public policy trends,

     * Due to their strong emphasis on national security and fighting crime,
     the FBI and the NSA will continue to advocate restraints on encryption
     technology and encourage the development of encryption devices and
     telecommunications systems which allow the government to continue
     conducting wiretaps.

     * The National Security Agency is likely to continue protecting its
     'turf' by advocating continued restrictions on encryption technology.
     It may attempt to expand its domain within the government, most likely
     at the expense of NIST.

     * As part of its efforts to reassert its control over encryption
     technology, the NSA will likely continue to favor closed forums where it
     can present sensitive, classified material which may not have been
     obtained had U. S. enemies been able to obtain effective encryption.
     These forums such as the National Security Council, will be favored by
     them over open ones.  The agency will continue its effort to keep
     relevant decisions out of the hands of Congress.

     * Many high-technology industries, particularly software publishing,
     will place increasing pressure on the government to liberalize
     restrictions on the use and export of encryption software and hardware.

     * Since the encryption policy issue has now been politicized63,  any
     action taken to reverse the Clinton administration's progress on the
     Clipper initiative or the current system of export controls will involve
     Congress as well as the executive branch.  The judicial branch (notably
     the Supreme Court) has not had occasion to rule on the issues
     surrounding the debate.






			     6.  POTENTIAL SCENARIOS


If and when a new cryptography policy emerges, there will be winners and
losers among the pool of 'players,' a pool that roughly consists of law
enforcement agencies, United States manufacturers and vendors of encryption
products, and the United States public. Based on the results of the preceding
analysis, four scenarios can be envisioned.

     1. Complete decontrol of cryptography.  The use of strong encryption by
     the United States public, as well as its export by United States
     manufacturers, could be completely decontrolled by the government at the
     direct expense of law enforcement and national security.  This would
     please some members of the public, for they would have maintained
     control over their privacy. United States manufacturers of encryption
     products would also likely benefit from this move.

     2. Domestic decontrol of cryptography with export regulations.  Strong
     encryption could remain decontrolled for use by the general public, but
     strict regulations would remain on its export. While the American public
     would still be relatively content, United States industries would lose
     sales and potential market share due to exclusion from the lucrative
     international market for encryption products.  The large domestic
     market, however, would remain open, guaranteeing some revenues for
     encryption product manufacturers.  Law enforcement agencies, on the
     other hand, would lose in the short term in either of these scenarios,
     because their electronic surveillance abilities would be diminished.

     3. Voluntary escrowed encryption.  Escrow a de facto standard.  (This is
     the Clinton administration's proposed scenario.)  The escrowed
     encryption standard could become a de facto national standard for voice,
     fax, and data communications over the public switched telephone network.
     While other encryption products would be built, they would gain little
     market acceptance because of demand for interoperability.  Thus, law
     enforcement would be able to listen in on most transmissions.  The
     encryption technology might be exportable to countries that implemented
     the same or a similar scheme and agreed to cooperate in international
     investigations.  United States manufacturers might gain or lose in this
     scenario; they would gain only if Clipper received widespread
     acceptance.  Law enforcement agencies would gain.

     4. Mandatory escrowed encryption.  The government could choose to keep
     complete control over encryption and enforce a technology similar to the
     escrowed encryption standard.  Law enforcement agencies would come out
     as winners for having maintained their surveillance capabilities.  But
     a black market for foreign encryption products smuggled into the United
     States would probably be created by members of the public, including
     criminals, who desire more secrecy.  How United States companies would
     react in this scenario depends on whether this government enforced
     standard is designed to be exportable or not.  If it is unexportable,
     United States companies currently involved in the manufacture and sale
     of encryption products would be almost completely blocked from the
     international market and would be restricted to marketing the government
     enforced standard domestically. This would result in considerable
     financial loss for the industry.  Some observe [65] that mandatory
     escrowed encryption can never be exportable, since if it were then
     products would be used in one country whose keys were escrowed elsewhere
     (or not at all), and this would not come to the attention of the
     exporting country's authorities until they attempted to snoop on
     someone; they would be reduced to prosecuting that person, if at all,
     for using a non-escrowed encryption device.  If, on the other hand, the
     standard is an exportable item, and designed with an eye to the
     requirements of the international market, then United States companies
     would be better off and could maintain a level of international economic
     competitiveness.

It is very difficult to determine which scenario is most likely and what its
consequences really might be.  The policy debate has to date been carried out
with each side making their own assumptions, not all of which are publicly
stated.  The economic implications for the Clipper proposal have not been
examined adequately.43   Use of an explicit model of the situation would make
these assumptions explicit, thus contributing to an informed discussion.

Recently, a user-friendly computer model64  based on an Excel spreadsheet has
been developed to investigate the costs, risks, and benefits of issues
related to the National Information Infrastructure.  Issues addressed include
digital telephony, export controls of cryptography, key escrow systems,
security features in communications hardware, etc.  It is designed to allow
users with varying political perspectives to make tradeoffs based on varied
parameter values, which the users have complete control over.  While
conceding that no mathematical model can adequately represent intangible
values or political tradeoffs completely, it offers a useful first step
towards a common ground for analyzing at least some of the problems described
above.  It has recently been offered to both to government and its opponents
in the key escrow debate.  Though it is beyond the scope of this particular
project, some of the investigators of this study plan to use it to further
explore the scenarios above.






				   REFERENCES


1.   Dorothy Denning, 'To tap or not to tap?' Communications of the ACM
     vol. 36, no. 3 (March 1993): 25-44.

2.   J. Chandler, D.  Arrington, and L. Gill, "Issues Regarding the Use of
     Cryptographic  Technologies in the Commercial Sector," George
     Washington University, National Law Center, 1993.

3.   J. Chandler, D.  Arrington, and L. Gill, "Foreign Encryption
     Technology Controls," George Washington University, National Law
     Center, 1993.

4.   National Bureau of Standards, "Data Encryption Standard,"  FIPS PUB
     46, (Washington, D. C.:  January 1977).

5.   G. Simmons, Contemporary Cryptology (Piscataway, NJ:  IEEE Press,
     1992).

6.   Dorothy Denning, Cryptography and Data Security (Reading,
     Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley, 1982).

7.   R. Rivest, A. Shamir, and L. Adelman,  'A method for obtaining digital
     signatures and public-key cryptosystems,'  Communications of the ACM
     (February 1978): 120-126.

8.   W. Diffie and M. E. Hellman, "New Directions in Cryptography," IEEE
     Transactions on Information Theory, vol. IT-22 (November 1976): 644-
     654.

9.   Peter Wayner, Statement in "Cryptographic Issue Statements Submitted
     to the Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board," by NIST,
     27 May 1993, pp. 13-17.

10.  Douglas Miller,  Interview by Steven Heckler and Ann Huybrechts, 26
     July 1993,  Software Publishers Association,  Washington, D. C.

11.  Martin Hellman (Stanford University electrical engineering professor),
     Interview by Faraz Ali, 11 August 1993, phone.

12.  Ilene Rosenthal,  Testimony before the Computer System Security and
     Privacy Advisory Board, 3 June 1993.

13.  Marc Rotenberg (Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility),
     Interview by Steven Heckler and Ann Huybrechts, 27 July 1993,
     Washington, D. C.

14.  Ivars Peterson, 'Encrypting Controversy,' Science News, 19 June 1993,
     394-396.

15.  Jim Bidzos,  Private communication with Lance J. Hoffman, 3 November
     1993.

16.  Philip Zimmerman,   Pretty Good Privacy 2.2 Manual, 6  March 1993.

17.  Peter Schweitzer, Statement in "Cryptographic Issue Statements
     Submitted to the Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board,"
     by NIST, 27 May 1993,  200-203.

18.  Dorothy Denning, Testimony before the Computer System Security and
     Privacy  Advisory Board,  29 July  1993.

19.  E. Brickell et al., "SKIPJACK Review Interim Report: The SKIPJACK
     Algorithm", 28 July  1993,  Posted on sci.crypt and many other places
     on the Internet.  Available from NIST.

20.  S. Micali, Fair Cryptosystems, Report MIT/LCS/TR-579.b, MIT Laboratory
     for Computer Science, Cambridge, Mass, November 1993.

21.  Y. Desmedt, Y. Frankel, and M. Yung, "A Scientific Statement on the
     Clipper Chip Technology and Alternatives," paper distributed at the
     Clipper session of the 16th National Computer Security Conference, 21
     September 1993.

22.  Gary H. Anthes, 'Use outpaces addresses on Internet,' Computerworld
     vol. 27, no. 17 (26 April  1993):  51-52.

23.  John Markoff, "Thing," The New York Times, 5 September 1993, Section
     9, p. 11.

24.  Stephen Kent, 'Internet Privacy Enhanced Mail," Communications of the
     ACM vol.  36, no. 8 (August 1993): 48.

25.  Stephen Crocker, 'Internet Privacy Enhanced Mail,'  The Third CPSR
     Cryptography and Privacy Conference Source Book, 7  June 1993.

26.  Peter Williams, OSISEC Introduction and Overview, University College,
     London, 15 April 1993.

27.  Datapro, Inc., Datapro Report on Encryption Devices, Delran, NJ, March
     1993.

28.  David Chaum, 'Achieving Electronic Privacy,'  Scientific American vol.
     267, no. 2 (August 1992):  96-101.

29.  Kevin Kelly, 'E-Money,' Whole Earth Review, Summer 1993.

30.  S. Von Solms and D. Naccache, "On Blind Signatures and Perfect
     Crimes," Computers and Security vol. 11, no. 6 (October 1992): 581-
     583.

31.  International Resource Development, Data, Fax, and Voice Encryption
     Equipment Worldwide, Report #782 (December 1991), New Canaan, CT, pp.
     267-271.

32.  Douglas Miller, Statement before the Computer System Security and
     Privacy Advisory Board, 1 September 1993.

33.  Dorothy Denning, Interview by Steven Heckler and Ann Huybrechts, 26
     July 1993, Georgetown University, Washington, D. C.

34.  William Ferguson, Testimony Before the Computer System Security and
     Privacy Advisory Board, 29 July 1993.

35.  Lance J. Hoffman, 'Clipping Clipper,' Communications of the ACM vol.
     36, no. 9 (September 1993):  15-17.

36.  Stephen T. Walker, Testimony before the Subcommittee on Economic
     Policy, Trade and Environment of the Committee on Foreign Affairs of
     the U. S. House of Representatives, 12 October 1993.

37.  J. Podesta, White House memo to Jerry Berman, Digital Privacy and
     Security Working Group, on Key Escrow Encryption Technology, July 29,
     1993.

38.  L. E. Christensen, "Technology and Software Controls" in Law and
     Policy of Export Controls:  Recent Essays on Key Export Issues,
     Section of International Law and Practice of American Bar Association,
     August 1993, pp. 3-33.

39.  International Traffic in Arms Regulation (ITAR),  22 CFR 120-130.

40.  Allan Suchinsky, Presentation at George Washington University,
     Washington, D.C., 30 June 1993.

41.  Edward Regan, 'United States Business Views On Encryption and The Key
     Escrow Chip,'  Testimony before the Computer System Security and
     Privacy Advisory Board, 30 July 1993.

42.  Addison Fischer, Statement in "Cryptographic Issue Statements
     Submitted to the Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board,"
     by NIST, 27 May 1993,
     pp.  204-215.

43.  Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board Resolution 93-5,
     1-2 September  1993.

44.  The White House, Press release concerning the key escrow initiative,
     16  April  1993.

45.  National Institute of Standards and Technology, "A Proposed Federal
     Information Processing Standard for an Escrowed Encryption Standard
     (EES)," Federal Register vol. 58, no. 145 (30 July  1993):  40791-
     40794.

46.  Chris Sundt, Testimony before the Computer System Security and Privacy
     Advisory Board, 29 July 1993.

47.  Testimony of representatives from  Fisher International,
     Hewlett-Packard, and Racal-Guardata before the Computer System
     Security and Privacy Advisory Board,  29 July 29 1993.

48.  Clark Weissman, 'A national debate on encryption exportability,'
     Communications of the ACM vol. 34, no. 10 (October, 1991):  162.

49.  Lou Giles, Presentation delivered at George Washington University,
     Washington, D. C.,  4 August 1993.

50.  Computer Security Act of 1987, Public Law 100-235 (H.R. 145), 101
     Stat. 1724-1730.

51.  James Kallstrom, Testimony before the Computer System Security and
     Privacy Advisory Board, 29 July  1993.

52.  Alan MacDonald, Interview by Steven Heckler, 22 July 1993.

53.  Statement of the American Civil Liberties Union in "Cryptographic
     Issue Statements Submitted to the Computer System Security and Privacy
     Advisory Board,"  by NIST, 27 May 1993, pp. 195-199.

54.  Digital Privacy and Security Working Group, white paper on key escrow
     encryption technology, 30 September 1993.

55.  James Chandler, Interview by Faraz Ali and Steven Heckler, 6 August
     1993, George Washington Univeristy, Washington, D. C.

56.  National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1994 (H.R. 2401,
     Sec. 267).

57.  V. C. Walling, Jr., D. B. Parker, and C. C. Wood, "Impacts of Federal
     Policy Options for Nonmilitary Cryptography,"  SRI International
     Research Report 32, April 1981, Menlo Park, CA.

58.  Charles Piller, 'Privacy in Peril: Macworld Special Report on
     Electronic Privacy," Macworld, vol. 10, no. 7,  July 1993, pp. 8-14.

59.  L. Harris and Associates, Harris-Equifax Consumer Privacy Survey 1992,
     New York: Louis Harris and Associates, 1992.

60.  Information Infrastructure Task Force, The National Information
     Infrastructure: Agenda for Action, Department of Commerce, 15
     September 1993.

61.  Jonathan Groner, 'When it Comes to Software, U.S. Sees Military
     Hardware; Concern over Spread of Encryption Codes Hurts Exports,'  The
     Connecticut Law Tribune, 21 December 1992, p. 12.

62.  H. R. 3627, "A Bill to Amend the Export Administration Act of 1979
     with respect to the control of computer and related equipment," 1993.

63.  J. Mintz and J. Schwartz, "Encryption Program Draws Fresh Attacks,"
     The Washington Post, 18 September 1993, p. C1.

64.  Dave Kohls and Lance J. Hoffman, "TurboTrade: A National Information
     Infrastructure Cost/Risk/Benefit Model,"  Report GWU-IIST-93-17,
     Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, The George
     Washington University, Washington, D. C., September 1993.

65.  R. Needham, private communication, 21 December 1993.

